[music]
Again, good morning everyone. Welcome again. It is one of the according Buddhism,
according to the lineage teaching. This is one of the great, joyous moments in our life.
We explore the teachings of the Buddha, the essence of the teaching of the Buddha,
and Dzogchen teachings. This Dzogchen teaching is not something that outside,
the other side of the side, we're trying to focus that. We're looking to our innate nature.
We discover our innate, beautiful nature that we didn't discover so many lifetimes.
Today, we're discovering that teaching by the gracious teaching of the Buddha Shakyamuni,
Gaurabha Masambhava, and all the lineage masters are pointing out, "Hey, you have the treasure.
This is your treasure. You should revert beyond that. Don't neglect that.
That is what it is. Therefore, it is so special. According the lineage, according the teaching,
according the spiritual seeking that we like to make change in the difference in our lives,
this is what it should be. This is therefore, we should bring more joy and appreciation, more
grateful.
Grateful. This is not something that we call accidentally because we are so powerful with these and
that things.
But truly, we are connected to this teaching, calmingly connected with this teaching,
and this is what the teaching is. So therefore, bring joy and appreciation.
And we're great, tremendous, grateful, these things.
Same time, according to the teaching, according to the Dokjin teaching,
according to the teaching of the Buddha Shakyamuni, we are doing these practices,
not just for only ourselves, but for all the living beings.
Bring them joy, peace, happiness. Remove their suffering, their difficulty, troubles.
Whatever they are going through in their lives, all the life after.
Really, truly, what we are going to do, truly explore, make this benefit to all those beings
as a ripple effect, bring them to their innate nature, discover their innate nature.
They're not just completely lost to the destination and the direction.
We find their direction, discover their innate nature.
Kind of reaching sincerely at the bottom of our heart, and that is known as in Buddhism, bodhijata.
Remember, you know this. Bodhijata is, again, I think something alien,
strange things we are trying to be. It is our nature. We discover.
Actually, Dokjin teaching is the essence of bodhijata teaching.
Dokjin is the embodiment, essence of the bodhijata, and bodhijata is love.
Bodhijata is compassion. Bodhijata is wisdom.
That combination, all that holds some quality is dokjin teaching.
So therefore, we should start right now. Dokjin is not something we're playing a game in the future
.
We're going to discover right now we should start.
Number one, or when we started with that, then we move the expanding,
growing the deeper, stronger, and higher, and then move forward.
Makes it joy, joy for ourselves, joy for all the beings.
Therefore, bring more joy and more bodhijata.
At the same time, also bring a little more kind of understanding, beauty in nature.
According to Dokjin teaching, according to the higher esoteric teaching of Buddhism,
entire universe is already enlightened, awakened status.
That means we are already enlightened, awakened status.
Only what is blocked, our dualities, our duality, publication of what we created,
that blocked the reality, the face of the natures of that.
But reality, it is pure that.
So today we're trying to discover that nature.
Therefore, kind of a little bit of open our heart toward that direction of the purity,
understanding.
All is everything is quite purity state.
And Dokjin teaching often said it's a medalla or the circle of the three kayas.
Dharmakaya, sambhokaya, narmakaya status.
We are in that state, universe is in that state, everyone is in that state,
no one is out of three kaya status, already enlightened qualities.
Bring that nature, again bring that light in our kind of state of mind.
It's all known as a practice.
We are really, not just a state, all the time,
myths of the duality and kind of publication.
And all these kind of like cold and dark and iced states, all the time.
Bring that light in the warmth of our heart and mind.
And that is known as the hallmark of the practice.
It is a practice, we are practice.
We like to make the change and the discover and the change ourselves,
discover our own nature.
That's what we are here, actually, explore that.
So therefore, all those are generally known as the foundation
and very necessary, important at the beginning times.
And with those, we would call it an intention and motivation.
And now, then we go to explore the meaning of the Dokjin teachings.
And of course, I'm sure you already know what the Dokjin teachings and all that.
But again, it's not just knowing is important.
Or knowing that is enough.
Because for us, we need to practice.
To do practice, we need to remind again and again,
again because our duality mind is very public, publication.
And it just always kind of like neglected and missed the point always.
Even we know that.
So therefore, again, kind of bring to reminding each other
is that our kind of like what we should do.
That's what the Buddha's teachings are called.
Sangha members means helping and supporting each other
along the path to reach enlightenment.
So as we are all Sangha members, and we remind each other.
So in that state, I will in a way remind you,
according to my best capabilities of the teaching,
through the light of the guru and sambhava and the lineage masters.
And how, through what we are going to do,
and that is then this great teaching.
I think many of you maybe read the book,
and you already have this.
This is the very famous Dzokhi teaching
that taught by the guru and sambhava.
And also even translated a long time ago, John Reynolds.
I think many of you maybe had that,
or maybe now even they have new version of translation too,
because Dharma is quite flourishing everywhere.
So that, I'm sure you read that.
But however, whether you read or not,
we will go on these meanings this.
Now, we talk a little bit about all this teaching generally,
and little bit history of the teaching, and that is how.
And this is again, Dzokhi teaching is the teaching of the Buddha,
Buddha Shakyamuni.
Buddha Shakyamuni gave this teaching,
not in the form of what we see Buddha, like this, not this form.
Buddha gave this teaching in the sambhava form.
And where he gave this teaching, in the Sahaja Rams,
and so many enlightened beings,
Dakas and Dakinis, Buddha Shakyamuni gave this teaching.
And also, often known as Buddha Shakyamuni gave Dzokhi teaching
in form of the Buddha Samyantabhadara
or the Buddha Vaidya Sato.
That Buddha Shakyamuni gave this teaching.
Teachings.
As this teaching, whether we give this teaching,
and this teaching is a camp in this human world,
very famous again in my teacher, master,
known as Garabdorgi.
Garabdorgi brought this Dzokhi teaching
or the reward, this teaching.
Teaching, Dzokhi teaching to this world.
And Garabdorgi was also known as the emanation of the Buddha Vaidya Sato.
It came in the form of the human Vaidya.
Garabdorgi is the form of the Vaidya Sato in human forms.
So that is what the Garabdorgi is, Garabdorgi.
And then, Garabdorgi is the form of the disciple.
The teacher is known as the Manjichiri Mathara.
And the Manjichiri Mathara,
the Manjichiri Mathara
entires Dzokhi teachings into three groups,
known as then the mind sections,
spirit sections, and the feet instruction sections.
That we divide into that three sections.
And then the form of the disciple of the Manjichiri Mathara
is known as Shri Sangha.
And Shri Sangha divided again the feet instruction section,
the third section of Dzokhi teaching,
divided into four or more sections,
out of the most secret sections of that.
And that all essence teachings,
then kind of reword by the great master of such board,
clear by board.
Then by Garabdorgi and Masambhava,
great master of Brahmana Mathras.
And later on, great master, master teacher.
That is really how the Dzokhi teaching is.
And then Murabar Masambhava, who came,
or Brahmana Mathras who came in that century.
And Murabar Masambhava is known as then
the direct emanation of the Buddha Amitabha,
and as well as the Buddha Shakyamuni himself.
Both came in one target as in Murabar Masambhava.
Murabar Masambhava reword so many Vajrayana teachings and board.
He is also known as the Vajrayana Great Buddhas.
He really brought so many reword,
so many teachings of Maghreel,
but also Vajrayana teachings to this world
and to the connected portion there,
all that with disciples.
And this is what Murabar Masambhava,
among that one of his great teachings,
among all teachings.
And then this is the Dzokhi teaching.
So that is how the Dzokhi teaching came.
And they continually preserved that Dzokhi teaching
in a debate by the practices,
meditation, meditation, and studying,
continually created on, until now,
as unbroken lineage and systems.
And this Dzokhi teaching also came a little bit.
When Murabar Masambhava gave the Dzokhi teaching,
this Dzokhi teaching is transmitted
in two different channels or two different systems.
Those are known as the Kama and the Thema Ladies.
So two systems, that is also related.
Also these two lineages,
all of them as one sundial lineage,
all came to separately, continually and now there.
And in particular today's teaching,
what we are going to discuss is Thema teachings,
all the hidden, rediscovered lineage teachings.
This is Murabar Masambhava told
in the 8th century, century, century,
and then same time,
thinking of the future generations,
then he and the Vasranathini teachings,
all the hidden in these teachings,
teachings, and then rediscovered by very famous,
one very famous young material known as the Kama Nambas.
Kama Nambas discovered these Thema teachings
around 16, no sorry, around 12 or 13th century,
around that time.
Around that time, he discovered this teaching,
and this become the one, the most powerful,
powerful Thema teachings.
Throughout all to be practiced in particular
of course, a new and a graduate school
to where Buddhism has become very popular teachings.
And in time, that whole cycle of teaching
is known as the Peaceful Wrath of deities,
and also self-liberated practice.
So from that cycle, this is the teaching, Kambhara.
Kambhara, this is known as then,
a kundra, a clear betas, let it, does it.
From the self-liberated realization,
mind of the performed Peaceful Wrath of deities,
this teaching is not introduced in a negative awareness,
negative awareness, moment you see breath liberation
or the realizations.
That is the title of these teachings.
So that is what it is.
And now, we go to the next phase itself.
So that's the really kind of overview
of how this lineage came and included titles.
And now, we go to this text itself.
And then, now, this is what?
First is homage.
Homage.
This is the word "Umbara Pema Sambhava",
which is as I said, hidden, read the score,
buy this great title.
He transcript this teaching.
So first is, "Umbara Pema Sambhava" is paying homage.
Pay homage or respect to whom?
"Umbara Pema Sambhava" respecting, paying homage,
homage to the three guys, as I said before,
and I'm sure you know three guys.
"Dharmakaya", "Sambhokaya", and then the "Makayas".
These three guys, these three guys,
he said, "I pay homage".
The deity or the Buddha of the three guys,
what is these three guys?
Where is this three guys?
It's sub-luminating one's own evolution.
Sub-luminating one's own evolution.
So this is not the three guys,
it's externally existing paying homage.
It is pointing out, this is, from here it is pointing out.
We all inherited this beautiful nature,
it is known as sub-evaleness.
Sub-evaleness is our nature.
That is inherited in each and every one, all with heaven.
We all have this.
This nature is in body meant for three guys.
This, it is, what, "evaleness" in Tibet,
what is called, "rapa", "rapa" or "evaleness".
It is, nature is what?
It is not done.
No "rapa" is not peaceful object.
It is sub-luminating.
This is your mind.
This is my mind.
It is our nature, that's the way we are.
So this time when we think, give this teaching,
or we go through this teaching,
we are not going to think in somewhere else's mind,
or somewhere else's talking nature.
It's very up your nature, nature of mind.
Everyone is talking nature.
So now we are here, very big in what the great mass
and the great mass are saying to you.
Your nature, "rapa" is sub-luminating.
It is clear.
This sub-luminates what is known as,
it is intelligence.
"Rapa" is intelligence.
"Rapa" is resistance.
"Rapa" is awareness, or the awareness is awareness,
is a belief in awareness.
And there is sub-luminating.
It's not somebody else coming
and putting the torch on that and illuminating.
It is sub, "rapa" itself is illuminating.
That how also we can know.
For example, we know ourselves.
When we are happy, we don't have to ask someone
to the doctor who said, "Am I happy?"
Do we need really ask to anyone then, "Am I happy?"
No, you know you are happy.
Also same time when we say it,
we don't have to go to ask anyone to say it or suffering.
You know that intelligence is known as sub-luminating,
sub-clarity, sub-intelligence.
It is not somebody else doing that.
It is our self, your nature,
nature and my nature.
This is the one that "rapa" is.
"Nature" is.
This if we go deeper that or let it return on this,
then this is in "krikāya".
That means "krikāya" means enlightened status.
"Rapa" is your nature,
my nature is all in enlightened status.
When we talk about the Buddha,
you are already talking about the Buddha as enlightened.
It is true Buddha is enlightened.
I mean, our "rapa",
"rapa" is enlightened.
Your "rapa" is enlightened.
My "rapa" is enlightened.
Enlighted, completely enlightened,
is not part of enlightened.
It is total, completely enlightened.
And how?
In a "krikāya" status.
"Dharmakaya" status, "Sambhokaya" status,
"Namakaya" status, we are all enlightened.
Every aspect of it,
we call it enlightened,
is right with you, right with us.
To recognize that nature as it is
and with delight and with confidence,
confident, that is known as beholding your nature of the mind,
my nature of the mind.
"Gurupaya Masanga" saying, "pering homages."
The other little homie means what?
The respect, right?
That I am going to report on.
Respect in the apricot.
But there is, according to the other little Buddhism,
Buddha still, there is three different ways,
respect.
Respect as an object and socket with great respect.
Or respect with understanding
where everything is like in the mandala of the Buddha,
as he said before in the music.
But in that realization being that state
is known as then meditation respect.
So when you don't have doubt and hesitation,
when you merge in that nature status,
that is respect.
That's right.
Respect, that is dream respect.
That's the second respect.
And the fourth, third respect is,
right in nature as it is,
is without a socket or an object.
That is the ultimate respect.
This time, pay homage to the self-illuminated clarity
of the three guide of the South Awareness,
it is the ultimate respect.
When you didn't see this,
there is no socket or an object divided.
There is no, not the door is the other side,
and what we are knowing is the other side,
not socket or an object.
Yes, as moment you used to recognize,
that moment is merged in one single state,
as free from the socket or an object.
That realization is known as in the ability
to talk yourself,
recognize that truly nature as it is.
This is the most highest relaxed practice,
highest performance,
highest merging in that state,
as beyond the socket or an object.
That means no humanities.
Humanity's domain is gone,
just merged in nature's state,
exactly as it is.
This is the word, pay homage.
Homage, this is,
this, this, this, this free homage,
as Guru Pemma Sambar said here,
this gathering really encompasses entirely these teachings.
But now these follow the teachings of all these,
these teachings about this rubber,
teachings about the three guides,
that's what it is.
Teachings about our, our nature, your nature,
my nature, this talk, talk.
That is, so this is the summary in the way
of the entire teachings,
hundreds of teachings.
Now going there more details on these teachings,
teachings.
So now we explore,
exploring what the nature is,
one after another step.
This exploring nature is
also generally in the Buddhism,
Buddhism teaching, what Buddhism in the teaching.
For example,
with Buddhism in the first teaching in Sarnam,
or Varanasu, what we called,
Paul Gautam of the teachings,
what Gautam said first,
Paul Gautam of the teaching is,
suffering truth,
must be master understanding suffering truths.
That's what Gautam said,
master understanding suffering truth.
Second, the Gautam of the teaching is,
you must be a bender cause of suffering truths.
Also United States is suffering.
Second,
a bender,
give up the cause of suffering truths,
cause of suffering truths.
How to give up the cause of suffering truths?
You must follow the path,
follow the path,
follow the path.
That is path truth,
follow the path truth,
all of it.
And third,
so report,
actualizing the cessation status.
What is season?
All the duality publications are season.
You must have actualized seasons.
So what is this form of truth,
the essence teachings,
for example,
in this case,
in the Philippines,
master understanding,
then have the determination to give up the cause,
turn,
follow the path,
then actualize it.
So now, in this case,
all of this teaching is follow with the path.
Follow with the path.
What do we like to cease?
We like to cease.
Dualities.
Duality ceased.
That is what we like to be actualized.
This duality is not going to cease.
We don't follow with the path.
In this case,
follow with the path or the path.
Follow the nature of the path as it is.
That is the what it is.
Follow with the path or the path.
Now, here,
with this understanding,
here,
then put the Masambhavana in our teaching.
(Applause)
So there are no following the path.
Following, we are going to follow the Dzogki path.
Dzogki is the highest teaching of the birds.
What actually, again,
to go breathe out is one after another.
What means Dzogki?
Dzogki is very old,
which means everything completely.
Nothing is missing.
In this case,
what is Dzogki?
Dzogki can be divided into three sectors.
The foundational Dzogki,
path Dzogki,
and the result Dzogki.
What is this path Dzogki?
The foundation Dzogki is the nature of our mind,
the nature of the Rapa.
That is foundation.
We are going to use this.
What is this nature?
Rapa is what?
Rapa is free from object and subject,
free from the existing, non-existing, needle and eating.
And Rapa is, in the general ballast terminology,
is a great emptiness,
great Mother Pandya Paramata,
great that nature,
great nature of that emptiness.
That is the foundation of Dzogki.
Once you have understood that foundation,
now you are going to explore that.
Following that,
that is known as path Dzogki.
Follow the path.
That means you are practicing.
Once you discover that foundation,
that nature,
is not just enough,
enough we have to bring that full realization.
To bring full realization is,
then,
practicing,
practicing.
Keep practicing.
That is known as following path.
And that is, then, in this teaching,
explaining,
explaining how to follow that path.
Once you follow that path,
then what do you actually do?
Realization,
nature,
Rapa,
anxiety as it is,
without any hindrance,
without any obstacles of,
you are reduced.
That is known as the fruit Dzogki.
Fruit Dzogki.
So that,
this kind of,
just keep that thought in the mind.
Mind,
that's how we follow that.
Now with this understanding,
when we follow this Dzogki,
follow the path,
then here,
great Master,
once again say this,
from the profound nature of the,
the peaceful Rapa teaching.
That's self-liberating.
And then,
I will show you that,
or I will point out,
self-liberating nature,
of the naked nature of the Rapa.
That is what Pirma says.
And now,
He said,
in order to start pointing out the Rapa,
Rapa,
here,
I'm going to be a Master Master.
He said,
in order to point out the Rapa,
Rapa,
listen,
or carefully,
or attentively,
pay,
attentively,
or pay,
pay attention,
for in that,
practitioner's,
for in the practitioner,
pay attention carefully,
and,
for in the practitioner's.
Or for in that,
noble son,
and noble daughter's.
So that's what he said.
He said, teaching, you absorb that teaching.
That means also,
teaching must be absorbed to the heart.
Not come from the right ear,
and lift other ears,
ears, kind of like exit,
but let that teaching absorb to the heart.
It is about our nature of the mind.
Your nature of the mind,
we're not talking any strange things anywhere else.
We're talking about our self,
our treasure,
our nature,
as I said before.
So therefore,
just pay attention now.
We're discovering one after another
our this beautiful nature,
the scholar or the mystery of these beautiful natures.
And now,
with that,
and then there is also some teachings.
The word said,
Samaya Jadya.
That is,
it's very precious,
very sugared,
and honor,
and respect,
and keep as your treasure,
keep as your heart and structure.
And now,
with that,
and then Gautama Sama begins here.
He said,
Eh Maho.
Eh Maho is a Sanskrit word,
means amazing,
awesome,
oh how wonderful, wonderful.
That means,
so that begins,
awesome,
wonderful,
amazing,
wondrous,
how beautiful it is.
That is beautiful.
The Treacle is with you.
Treacle is with me.
This is one of the brilliant day of today,
we're discovering our Treacles.
We're not missing anything.
The whole Treacles are with us.
Whole Treacles of the Enlightenment beings,
all Treacle of the samsara,
everything is with us.
All that started from here,
from your Rupa,
from your Maho Rupa,
all awareness,
all my awareness.
Therefore, it's wonderful.
It's how rich,
how powerful,
how pervasive,
how glorious,
how deep,
and how infinite it is.
For that reason,
it's so amazing,
so marvelous,
so wonderful.
That's what is it.
Now,
in the teachings,
so what that said,
and then Gautama Sama says,
now of this mind,
mind is the pervasive college,
pervasive,
both samsara and Naranas.
Naranas.
Narana and samsaras,
what we,
I think many of you know,
this is the Buddhist,
in the Buddhist teachings,
the big terminology.
Samsara means,
all this universe of all.
This is called samsaras.
And Narana is all the Enlightenment things.
Every time,
what we're looking forward,
all the Buddhist practices,
looking forward to reach,
to become,
to capture the Naranas,
or the Enlightenment,
or the Buddha,
Buddha's dominion,
Buddha's environment,
enlightened environment,
which is so powerful.
Samsara is where we are,
and Narana is what we're looking forward
for by the practitioners.
These two are so big,
so gigantic,
so pervasive in a way.
But where that started,
who's ruling that?
That these two,
is no other than one's own mind.
So that means,
Narana is coming from your mind,
samsara is coming from our mind,
or our mind or your mind.
It's nothing else.
Therefore,
mind is the most powerful.
Our mind,
everyone's mind is so powerful,
according to Buddhism,
it is the de-mostly producer
of every environment,
of everything,
both in samsara and Naranas.
His mind,
if I use the word now,
the awareness.
Rupa,
Rupa is the producer
of both samsara and Naranas.
What is the difference in Buddhism,
or in the Dzokhi teaching?
Sometimes, generally,
there is mind in India too,
I think there is a miniature,
synonyms about the mind.
Mind,
thought,
intelligence.
I mean,
you have many names of the mind.
In the Tibetan Buddhism,
there is so many names in the mind,
about the synonym of the mind.
But particularly in the Dzokhi teaching,
use the mind and the Rupa.
Mind is,
I am translating,
mind.
Mind and the Rupa,
what is in the Dzokhi teaching?
Same in the Rupa.
If we translate the same into English,
it is mind.
Rupa,
if we translate it into English,
it is awareness.
What in the Dzokhi teaching
makes that big distinction.
What is the distinction of the mind,
or same in the Rupa?
Or mind and awareness?
And mind is duality.
Dualities.
Rupa is pretty from the dualities.
So now you think,
what is the difference?
Both have the intelligence.
Both have clarity.
Both have,
what do you call it?
I am a Muslim.
Both have.
But one is
duality, one is out of duality,
or pretty from duality.
Duality.
And what is the,
both are,
where is both?
Both are the same nature.
There is no different compartment of the mind
or the Rupa,
or same in the Rupa,
or mind and awareness.
Both are the same.
With duality is called mind.
Without duality is known as awareness or the Rupa.
I am translating awareness,
Rupa as awareness.
And samsara is produced
by the dualities.
And nirvana is produced
by the beyond duality,
or Rupa.
Mind that which is beyond or pretty from dualities.
So that is the difference.
What is the difference between?
Otherwise, both are the same.
That.
So now,
this is the nature of the mind.
Mind is pervasive
to both samsara and nirvana.
Nirvana,
this is what it is.
But when you don't recognize this nature,
because we are duality,
we are conjugated by force of dualities.
Dualities,
dualities,
then we.
Duality always looking subject and objects.
Subject and objects,
and always thinking something is outside.
Outside and carried by that.
And as we are kind of deluded by that looking solution from the outside,
then it is just continually deluded.
Deluded one after another.
And just ripple effect,
or it is chain reactions.
It is just continually carried by force of duality
and wandering in the world of dualities.
Reality level,
that duality itself.
That duality itself is not really existing as a subject or object.
If you investigate, analyze,
where is this duality?
What is that?
The moment you put that inquiry
to the system of duality,
the best of duality,
identity of duality,
nature of duality is collapsed.
Collapsed.
And that is what in the Dzokhi teaching,
known as liberated.
Where?
Liberated.
Its own natural status.
Natural status.
Natural still has a great emptiness.
Great openness.
It is like naturally dissolved or naturally liberated.
And when we duality is fabricated as a subject or object,
then we didn't recognize this nature of the mind.
That clarity and continually arising awareness,
we didn't recognize.
Recognize.
And because we carry the force,
we are looking to the one direction all the time.
Duality is gone at the mind,
narrow mind and looking to the other directions.
And this is how we can see that.
And however,
the nature of your mind or our rukpa,
our mind is nothing really obscured,
even by the dualities.
Even dualities during all this publication
is only happening on the surface.
On the surface,
reality nature of the rukpa is nothing blocked at all.
It's totally open freedom in an unstoppable status.
It's therefore called unseasoned status.
Nature is unseasoned.
It's continually throwing these rukpas.
This is, in order to recognize this nature,
exactly to find out the teachings,
to the nature of the mind,
all those teachings are given by the Buddha.
All the teachings,
those teachings are known as the 84,000 standard teachings.
Buddha gives all those teachings
only to recognize the secret system of the nature,
of our awareness or the nature of the mind or the rukpa.
Otherwise, there is nothing Buddha gives any teachings
except to recognize this nature of the mind,
all these teachings.
Everything, whatever the Buddha gives the teachings,
it's all purpose to discover this innate nature,
the system as it is.
Those old teachings the Buddha gives,
why Buddha gives so many of those teachings?
Buddha doesn't want to give, make the forceful to,
accord their readiness, accord their capability.
Readiness, Buddha gives all those teachings.
Those teachings, are they explaining these teachings?
Or maybe I won't go, but,
but however, those teachings are known as the,
all those according to my system is called nayana teachings.
All the teachings, all the Buddhist generally say,
all the Theravada teachings,
mayana teachings and as well as vedayana teachings,
all those teachings Buddha gives.
Every teaching is aligned toward to discover this nature.
They teach one after another gradually to discover
our inner nature, nature of the mind.
Every teachings, all teaching really follows to that direction.
There's nothing else, else, all these teachings.
So, that's what the Murabaya Masambhasa did this.
This, all the teachings that so vast, so deep,
so profound, 84,000 teachings or more plus teachings,
whatever the Buddha give the teachings of the,
like Buddha Shakyamuni who is called Buddhism
is considered as the Buddha of the person term,
or person, these eras.
Whatever will give that teaching is purpose to discover these teachings.
Pasture Buddhas of the according Buddhism, Buddhism,
there is like according one thousand Buddha of the fortunate eons,
I think many of you already know those,
and then three Buddha came before.
What they give Buddha, those teachings,
only purpose to discover this nature.
And the future upcoming among the one thousand Buddha,
there is 996, I think, Buddha is going to come.
Those teachings are all teaching of the, to discover this nature.
Nature, otherwise there's nothing else.
So, whatever, and then in this Buddha's teaching,
or Buddha Shakyamuni's teaching, divided according to human,
nine yana teachings, such as like Shravagayana teaching,
but the Buddha teaching, Bodhisattva yana teaching,
those are known as the causal yanas,
all the sutrayana, sutra teachings,
and tantarana teaching can be divided into two groups,
outer tantra, inner tantra,
and outer tantra can be divided into three more,
which is known as kriya tantra, oba tantra, yoga tantra,
and inner tantra can be divided into maha yoga,
anu yoga, ati yoga, all those teachings.
Teaching is the only to propose, to discover our inner nature of the mind,
nature of the thing.
What is, what the reason to, why have to discover this inner nature?
I think we said so many times, you know,
because then we discovered our inner nature,
the samsara delusion will be ended,
samsara delusion will be free,
and then what we call, we become the enlightenment,
we become the Buddha.
It's nothing changed anything then,
but our environment is become as environment of the pre-formidualities,
enlightenment qualities.
Then we don't have the struggling of the samsara,
all the turbulence what we go through in the samsara.
That nightmare, that phenomena is removed
or liberated within our own inner nature state.
That's applied somewhere else, but it's just sub-liberated,
within it in nature state.
Our environment is completely become as enlightened state.
All the delusion and the fabrications
and the difficulties, challenges are completely ended.
That is known as the end of the samsara,
end of the delusion, or the end of all heart-shaven difficulties.
So that is what it is.
Therefore, that is what this teaching says.
All these teachings, whatever the Buddha gives,
is teaching to recognize and to discover our distributed inner natures.
So that is one breathing, kind of like one's sessions.
But again, moreover there is going to be samsara teaching,
this, then here.
It says again, "Oh, how amazing!"
The 14th day, "Naba son" and "Naba daughter"
listen to me, listen to me.
And to discover this nature of the mind,
or to discover this nature of the mind,
there is so many varieties of the philosophical systems that came.
Variety of the philosophical systems and schools
and religious spiritual groups coming one after another
to discover this inner nature.
There is many of those.
So many schools, so many different things.
And so that, and to really summarize that,
and all this, what is this mind is known as,
and only what is this mind called?
What is the only mind?
They didn't recognize the nature of the mind,
and therefore they are wandering in the three realms or the six realms.
They are wandering.
We are all wandering in the three realms, six realms,
because not knowing the nature of our mind or nature.
Somebody tell nature, we don't recognize that,
and we are wandering in the three realms or the six realms.
Three realms, I think if we use those terminologies,
the three realms is known as desire realms,
palm realms, and palmless realms.
Six realms, three lower realms, and three upper realms.
So altogether, six realms.
And those are just listed as names, and you can look to the others.
That's two of those people who don't know those things.
And this is according to the Buddha's teaching,
there is six realms, six realms.
So that means, in a way, almost six different categories of beings
who are experiencing six different kinds of environments,
because due to their own karma or their own dualities.
And those six realms, such as hell realms,
hunger ghost realms, animal realms.
And then the fourth is our human realms,
and the fifth is known as the asara realm or demi-gods realms,
and the sixth is the realm of the gods or the divine.
That's those all known as six realms.
No matter whatever their environment,
whatever their experience they are going to throw,
but still they are all dualities.
Therefore, there is samsara, all of that in samsara.
They can be changed.
Change is samsara, samsara.
Samsara, we are wondering. Why is it called wondering?
Why is it used more and more wondering that, or wandering, or roaming?
Roaming, because, and that in a way living beings,
according to Buddhism, I mean, you all know,
that it's not the first time we came here,
nor it will be not last.
As long as we have the fuel of the karma and the dualities,
our moving, the environment of the system is never going to end.
As long as you have the cause and condition to be dreaming,
dream not going to end.
As long as you are sleeping and cause and condition are there,
we begin to dream all the time.
Dream not going to end.
Similarly, samsara experience is never going to end.
And as long as fuel of the ever used terminology symbol, the dualities.
As long as we have duality, that long we will be wandering in samsara.
And that's wandering in samsara according to our degrees,
our creation and fuel of the dualities.
If duality created something big, heavy cause as fuel,
that will take us to the lower realms.
As light fuel of duality, it will take to the upper realms.
That's what according to Buddhism, Buddha taught that.
So samsara that we be wandering.
How long we are going to wander?
Until we realize our nature of the mind or the rupa.
Until we realize that long we are going to wander.
Wander that.
And once we recognize the rupa,
or once we discover our innate nature of the mind,
then we are not going to wander.
We are not going to roaming.
Roaming.
And we are going to become as enlightened beings or the great Bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva is an enlightened being.
The Buddhas, they are not roaming because they see the future destinations.
They see everything within their awareness.
Everything is in their radar, radar sports.
For example, ourself, we don't know, many of us,
we really don't know what is going to be next year or even next week.
We are always on the presumption status.
And we don't know anything of the past.
That then what have their memories of our young times.
Before that, we don't know.
In the future, we don't know. There is only small window of light in the present time we see.
That is also very small, very tiny.
We really don't see.
That's how the duality is blocking us.
Every, our environment, even our intelligence, our understanding is blocking.
So our is presumptions.
And whatever the duality takes, we are in the kind of mercy or the hand of dualities.
But the Buddhas are enlightened beings.
They are enlightened.
They see past, they see present, they see future.
Everything is in their control and the destination.
Therefore known as emanations, emanating.
Our birth is rebirth. It's not emanation. Nations.
Even we are taking the similar same way.
The emanation taking the birth, we are taking the birth,
but it's kind of different styles, different systems.
Even looks like same, but it's different.
One is fully understanding.
One is unknowing show by the chance of the duality or the karma.
So we are wondering.
In a way we are wondering without knowing the destination
as like blindfold of the dualities.
That's why Maripam or Samba are used.
Then wondering in some six realms.
Why is the wandering there?
Here he said, I said already said that,
because not knowing the nature of the mind.
We are wondering, wondering.
And then according Buddhism,
Buddhism, Sharvaka Jhana and the Pate Buddha Jhana
realized the nature of the mind on one part, not fully again.
They didn't realize completely that.
That and then so forth.
So then according to the looking of the Zukhi teaching,
it's the highest teaching of the Buddha Shaktamunyas.
Is it a great master of Lunkiva use the example
as like peak of the mountain, panakkal of the top of the mountain,
mountain of mountain Sumerus.
When you look to the panakkal of the top of the mountain,
when you read the highest of the mountain, peak of the mountain,
when you look all under that,
you see how high which mountain is high.
You can see, see clearly which is high, what is this.
Similarly, when you look in the point,
in the standing kind of view of the Zukhi teaching,
looking to all the other teachings of the Jhanas,
then see the explorations or exploring of the nature of the mind.
How much they explode? What is this?
So if you're looking from the top of the mountain
or the panakkal of the Zukhi view,
then when you look to all the other earth Jhanas,
including Mahayoga, Anayoga, what is,
what they discovered natures.
So in that point view, then there is also always
there is some kind of like, some incomplete, incomplete, incomplete.
Therefore, Zukhi is a complete teachings,
complete all the Zukhi teachings.
So here, Gurbayama Sambo said everything.
For example, all these different schools,
including Mademaga, Kriayoga, Tantra,
and as well as Mahayoga and Anayoga.
There is still some undiscovered natures
and a code to compare with the Zukhi teachings.
Where the Zukhi teaching is fully discovered.
What is fully discovered?
Because Zukhi teaching is not connected
or is going beyond, sorry, I should say,
it's beyond of the mind.
Every other school's teachings
are still based on the conceptual or the same,
same and conceptual basis.
But Zukhi is beyond of the mind.
Or it is Yishi or the, what's the, pristine,
pristine awareness states.
So therefore, therefore, each of when you look to the,
even the Mahayoga, Anayoga teaching,
it still has some degrees of the, of the,
of the conception aspect, kind of focus on this.
Such as the Mahayoga teaching,
focus on the more kind of purity divine status,
which is so special, pure, pure.
But again, to compare with the Zukhi,
that that purity conception is duality.
Duality still is duality.
Anayoga teaching is a more design,
again, more, more purity, more blissfulness.
More blissfulness, more spaciousness nature.
And to compare with, again, to the Zukhi,
that is the conceptions, still the conceptions.
So breakthrough, all the conceptions
immediately to the, leading to the self-awareness
beyond the duality is the Zukhi teaching.
So therefore, this Zukhi teaching is the highest teachings.
And every others are really leading.
Leading still can relate some tendency of the different duality.
But this is not the errors of these teachings.
Teachings, generally what the Buddha gives the teaching,
accord and readiness,
accord and capability of the practitioners,
Buddha is leading that.
So Zukhi is the highest and therefore,
this teaching is what is completed.
Everything is completed.
Whole entire teachings.
Now, so that is the kind of generally explanation
of the how the Zukhi teaching
and how the Zukhi teaching is so special
and highest in teachings.
And the next group, I mean now,
so there, the next teaching is now
talking about more nature of the mind.
Now the teachings on nature, more nature of the mind.
Now, we look to our mind.
You look to our mind.
What is mind?
When you look to the mind,
mind is intelligence,
mind is a river right here.
Here.
That is what the mind.
You look, I mean, when I talk this,
you look to your mind.
You must correct it what Gurbel somebody say
with your own mind right now.
Right now.
So, here, Gurbel somebody said,
mind is vuvat, mind is intelligence.
You read.
It is true or not.
When you read this, now,
what that intelligence vuvat mind is,
is where is this?
Where is this?
Again, you look to that.
Read that with your mind.
Where is your mind?
What point we find the answers with this?
This.
We will ask this each question.
So, not just we ask.
Gurbel somebody was asking that.
Introducing, pointing out,
directly to our energy and nature of the mind.
We are exploring our nature.
The hidden nature.
Nature.
Therefore, and firstly, what Gurbel somebody said,
is vuvadily aware and intelligence.
That which is oscillating roughly, this meaning.
So, is this true or not?
And what the answers we have.
And then the next one is,
where is that now intelligence vuvat talks?
Where is this?
What answer we have?
Next one, Gurbel somebody said,
from this mind, all this pain and happiness arising.
From this mind.
Our pain and our happiness.
It's also arising from this.
Now we think of this generally.
What that means then that?
Generally in the Dzogic teaching,
teaching in Buddhism,
what's called, there is like,
for example, as we went through,
through kind of different names, at least in the names.
There is Buddhism.
Sharakayana, Parthigbuddhayanas.
And bodhisattvayanas.
There is postriyanas.
Yanas.
And bodhisattvayana is another synonym is Mahayanas.
Mahayana can be divided into two groups.
Those are known as mind only schools
and Mademaka schools or the middle way schools.
These two schools.
Promised only schools, what that means mind only school?
Named.
It's because named in this school says everything is mind.
That means subject is mind, object is mind.
Our environment everything is mind.
Everything is mind.
Mind.
There is nothing.
It's all mind.
Then maybe we argue how we can see this is mind,
this all object is mind.
It's not really mind we can see.
See that.
But in this school says this is,
we developed this from long-term egos.
There are three habit patterns.
Habit patterns of the universe,
habit patterns of the physical,
habit patterns of the environment or the usage.
The three habit patterns we developed long-term egos.
That is three habit patterns.
This is what they use examples in the dream.
When we are dreaming,
when we are sleeping in a warm bed and vice pillows
and we have the dreams,
when we have the dreams,
what we have dreams?
We have subject, we have object.
We have usage of that.
Object program in the universe,
building house and all these things we have.
And subject we have we are,
we are ourself, we are engaging that.
Usage we have good and bad and feeling and all those things.
All those things we have.
These three things are where it comes from.
These three things vividly we have in the dream.
All that.
Where that comes from?
It's nothing but from our mind.
Everything comes from our mind.
Hold that systems.
Whatever our experience,
all whatever we are going through is our mind.
This is how similarly we develop that thought long time ago.
Long time means what?
According to Buddhism,
big and less times,
we've been wandering in the samsaras.
During that time we develop that habit patterns.
In this school says,
each time we're making stronger habiture because our duality,
grass and cling,
make stronger, stronger, stronger, stronger,
and then we develop the whole these environments.
Reality level is nothing,
is all emanated projected by the mind.
Everything.
That's what the mind only schools.
This is the rough,
this is one of the profound philosophy schools of the Buddhism.
This is very deep and profound.
That, but this is just kind of a highlight of the kind of symbol that you're telling this.
From this mind only school,
all the way to the Dzogchi teaching,
saying there's no difference as everything is the mind.
Therefore, I'm going to remember somebody saying here,
this mind is vivid,
mind is like intelligence,
and where is this mind?
And this developed, all this happiness and peace,
all come from this.
From this.
This is again what is there for.
When you bring this realization,
bring this clearly understand of the way the nature is,
everything is our mind.
Actually, really our mind.
For example, like when we're talking about the Sathya Sathya,
Sathya Sathya said five aggregates, five aggregates,
that is, I think many of you know this,
form aggregates, feeling, perception,
conception, and conscience.
Those are known as five aggregates.
These five aggregates, according to Buddhism,
every combined things can be included within the five aggregates.
There's nothing is left out.
Whether it's malakku, whether it's bottom,
the new term, right?
Bottom, new term.
I'm sorry.
That you know, I think, what I'm talking then.
That's it, I think.
All atoms, atoms, ballad, atoms,
all the quantum physics, whatever you're talking,
the matter, the mass, something, it all, nothing is not within
this five aggregates, according to Buddhism.
Everything is this.
Everything of these five aggregates looks like big five departments,
five things, big things.
But if we can't single out,
among the five, for our conceptual level,
five aggregates, among our conceptual level,
among the five aggregates, four aggregates are our mind,
four aggregates are our mind.
Four, we live out, for time being,
and then feeling, perception,
consumption, consciousness is all mind.
There's nothing else.
That is mind.
So now, when you're thinking of this,
like feeling, the happiness and pains are mind.
What is that?
It's feelings.
Feeling, that feeling aggregate,
this feeling is, is mind.
Who is experiencing that?
It is happiness.
Who is identifying it is suffering?
No other than the mind.
And this is, we're talking, the celestial level,
we're not talking any mysteries.
Mysteries are anything this. It's just the way things are.
It's really mind.
Mind. Who's mind?
Your mind, my mind.
When I say I'm happy, it's my mind.
When I say I'm sad, it's my mind.
I don't.
And that happiness, happiness said is not necessarily permanent.
That can be changed.
Somebody's happiness, somebody's pain.
Somebody's pain, somebody's, it can be happiness.
There's no substantial solid existing happiness and peace
or happiness and sufferings.
That's why it is all mind.
It's all the, what's called illusion,
display of the illusions.
That's how the samsara of the world it is.
There's nothing is, conquer the solid that is.
It's all idea, all mind, all that.
And then when you look to the mind, where is the mind?
What the Gaurabai Masama pointed out here?
Or the Jockey teaching.
Teaching in the Mahamudra teaching, Mademat teaching,
all those teachings pointed out.
The Pandya Paramata teaching is mind.
And where is mind?
And mind is nowhere.
Therefore in the Buddhist Mahayana teaching or those Mademat teaching,
mind is beyond of the existing, non-existing,
either and neither.
Neither all those application looks like,
kind of like a puddling world.
It's true.
It's trying to discover it to kind of pulling up the angles of the dualities.
Pulling up the kind of knocking out the duality and anchorage.
Anchorage.
And bring the openness state of the nature where the things are.
That is what the teachings all about this.
This.
And then, this is,
also this mind is named so many, so many, so many schools,
so many publics named on this mind about this.
They have so many names.
Names.
Some say it's souls.
Some say it's atmos.
And some say it's mind.
Mind.
Some say it's the Pandya Paramata.
Some say it's Dattankadangarvas.
Some say it's Mahamudras.
Some say it's one spear of the, one spear,
one spear.
One say it's, some say it's Darmadattu.
Some say it is all, all,
so-called in the storehouse, all,
best of alls.
And some say it's ordinary minds.
Have so many names.
Treat this realistically point where I'm naming this.
It's no other than the mind.
Mind.
And everyone talking about this.
Because no one is talking about all those names with this body.
Body is going to live.
Body is according to Buddhism.
It's borrowed from the elements.
Fire, water, wind, and earth.
This is borrowed, in a way.
It's illusion.
We're going to live.
It's just a question of how long it will last.
How many years?
It's just borrowed.
But everyone is, all those schools,
someone said, someone took,
something deeper than the body.
They're going to live after body is gone.
They're naming where is.
No other, there's nothing else than the mind.
All those different names came.
And they made all the different explanations,
different public, different kind of put things on this input,
so many inputs to this mind.
Nothing else.
No matter whatever it is.
It's all it is.
Going around, backside, frontside, all this.
Naming this, this.
And some know it a little bit, some know it not.
And that's what in the Dzogki teaching kind of use examples.
Examples, Dzogki and the elephant,
fanned, fanned, analyzed by the,
analyzed by the born with blind.
Born with blind.
And so they heard so many times elephant.
Now elephant came.
And they're blind, born from the blind.
Born with blind, blind.
They're looking to the, touch to the, to the legs.
Elephant leg.
Or they thought the elephant is really big.
It's look like tree.
It's that loud.
Like this.
And they've looked some, some, some touch to the elephant.
Tails.
And it's moving, moving.
Or elephant is moving things.
And some looking to the elephant trunks.
Trunks is a kind of flexible moving.
Or it's a flexible looks like big snakes.
Snakes.
And some look like the tusk.
Tusk, touch to the tusk.
Hold.
And they said, oh, elephant looks like hard as bone.
Like tusk.
And all named so many things about that one elephant.
Fanned.
Because they're blind.
They didn't born with blind.
They did.
Similarly, when you don't know the exactly clearly,
people name so many things.
They didn't know little bit, but they didn't understand completely fully.
And all different names and indications and inputs came one after another.
So, this is.
But now, this is the mind.
This is that, whatever that is mind, whatever the name it is.
This.
Now, I'm going to, somebody's pointing out.
Out.
Out to this.
Now, you look to this mind.
It's already said many times, but this is continuing,
explaining our inner nature of the mind.
Mind, one after another.
And when you look to this mind,
into the three time frames,
past, present, and future.
This mind.
And now, you think, where is my past mind?
And this is not just past mind.
We told me about the last week, or yesterday, or a few hours ago.
Right this moment.
Your mind.
One second before.
Before, or one moment before, that mind.
Where is?
Have you read or asked that question?
What is our answer?
Answer.
The answer, there's no answer.
It's free from the trace.
Trace, it is clay emptiness.
That is what you see.
And when you think that this,
the present moment.
What is this present moment?
Moment, moment.
Present moment of thought.
Where is this present moment of thought?
My thought.
Have you asked that question?
What we have the answer?
Answer.
There's again, same, nothing.
And present means, not future thought arrived.
Thought.
So, what is this now?
When you look to this mind,
when you look to this three front,
past, past moment, present moment,
and future moment, kind of free from that three frames,
you look to the mind.
Mind, the answer is here in Guru Purnima Sahib,
it's nothing to see.
Nothing to see, but except brilliant.
Kind of openness.
Openness.
That is what you have to answer.
This is what according to Dokriti teaching,
or in Buddhism, is known as direct perception.
Direct, valid perception, or valid cognitions.
It's not diluted by entities.
Not by the imaginations.
Not presumptions, not conceptions, in a way.
It's direct, valid cognitions.
Because it's direct, why?
It's like this moment.
Like this moment.
You're looking direct to your own nature,
to the awareness.
When you look to that nature, it's known as fresh.
This nature is what Guru Purnima Sahib named here,
naked, fresh.
It's naked.
What is naked?
It's a drama of the past is free,
future is free, and present, all the dramas are free.
It's naked, fresh, everness, as it could be, should be.
It's as simple, natural, as it is,
free from all our drama of thoughts.
Now you look to this, this nature.
Nature.
Nature, if you look to this, is open, unimpeded status.
That's nothing is existing.
Nothing is existing.
That we can hold.
Again, of course, you're all looking to your mind this time,
the nature of the mind.
As I said so many times,
you know we're not talking about somebody else's mind
or somewhere else's talking.
We're really talking.
Guru Purnima, somebody is pointing out,
"Write our nature of your mind, my mind."
That's how we're going to discover the nature of that
so that we can maintain, meditate.
When we meditate, what is called meditation is practice.
Practicing is practice.
Practicing, in this case, meditating is practicing.
Or practicing is meditation.
When we do the meditation,
meditation should be with confidence.
Confidence.
Meditation should not be lingering with perceptions.
When you have the confidence,
that's what you're going to discover.
So now you're really discovering your innate nature
exactly as it is.
Free from drama, free from perceptions,
free from the talking, talking by someone.
You're looking directly to your own nature.
The nature of the mind or the awareness.
As you discover whatever,
you're going to maintain that.
That maintaining is meditation.
Maintaining is practice.
That is what we're going to change in our environment.
Our whole perceptions, conceptions,
things, really we're going to change.
From this, we're looking to the heart
of the heart and source of everything.
Every environment as Sid, I mean I said in teaching Sid,
is all developed from mind.
This is, we're looking now to that producer,
that developer.
We're going to change its own nature,
not drama ruled by the dualities.
We're not going to wondering the outskirts of this nature.
We're looking to the heart of the nature of the awareness.
Awareness from that, we're going to rule our environment,
our old systems.
So therefore, this therefore,
when we develop the "Wu" or the "Zoki" teaching,
we need confidence.
Every "Wu" we generally say,
I'm sure you heard this,
meditation and conduct.
You heard those teachings, I'm sure.
"Wu" is so important.
Important, that is what you're going to maintain.
That is what, that is the whole thing.
"Wu" will be meditational with "Wu".
Conduct with "Wu".
Then result will get.
Therefore, this is what we're really teaching.
This is something so important.
Always those great masters, one after the other said,
said that confidence is so important.
This time we're not developing confidence.
Somebody said, oh, I trust you, I have confidence.
That is, of course, confidence too.
But this time, you're looking to the right to your,
our nature of the mind,
with our own intelligence,
with valid, valid cognitions.
And when you discover that nature,
nobody can just put to you.
It's nature, your nature, that's it.
That's what you're going to stand firmly,
tall and strong, and maintain that.
Maintain that.
So therefore, this is the word,
but this is, so it is.
When you look to this natural,
it is open, naked, fresh.
When you behold this, there's nothing substantial,
solid, existing, that we can hold.
It's totally empty.
But that empty is not negation empty.
Negation is not blank empty.
It is clarity.
It's brilliant.
Therefore, it's known as, in the teaching,
clear emptiness, or clarity emptiness,
emptiness with clarity.
Inseparable clarity.
This clarity is what?
It's intelligence.
Even though there's nothing substantial
to hold and grasp, there is,
but it is real intelligence.
This is our nature of the mind.
So therefore, it's not empty, empty as a blank.
It's not, it's kind of clarity or something like,
as a torch or light or a bulb like that,
but it's just open, a clear, clear voice.
That is what the nature of the mind is.
This, this.
So this nature is not also permanent.
It's not permanent because there's nothing existing.
When we say it's permanent, that means something existing,
but there's nothing existing.
Therefore, it is not nothing we can name as permanent.
Permanent.
And also, this nature, as we can now say,
is like blank or the empty, or blank,
or if we use the word, null state,
or complete kind of blank, absent status.
It's not.
It's building intelligence.
How mystery, how wonderful it is.
That's how this, our, our nature of the mind is.
It's open, brilliant, vivid intelligence.
How it is.
And it is also that we cannot put its numbers.
It's not just one, we can say.
Or this is one.
One.
How we can say one, there's nothing existing that we can hold.
It's one.
There's nothing.
Nothing.
It is also arising in the same time.
All this, as already Gurbi and Masambha said,
all the samsaras and naranas are arising from this.
And with, what is that?
There's nothing.
How marvelous, how special it is.
Therefore, in the Buddha's teaching, always inexpressible.
Inconceivable.
It's something that you cannot put by the imagination
or the conception frames to this nature.
This is what our nature is, your nature and my nature is.
How it is.
Is.
And also if we say all the samsara and narana,
everything arises from this and all this.
But from where?
It arises.
Can you pick one location of each of those?
No.
Again, it's totally free that.
So all the dhammas, all the frames of what we over with,
we named, cannot really apply any of this.
This.
This is what the nature, marvelous nature of the mind is.
Is.
And this is not coming from outside or anywhere.
It is your and our nature of the mind.
Nature of the mind.
This.
So this is what the nature of the mind is.
Is.
Okay, I will stop here and we have some questions I'd like to discuss.
Yeah, please.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Dennis.
Dennis, give me the water.
Thank you.
Okay.
Just a plain water.
No, it is just hot water.
I thought about it.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you so much.
Yes, please.
Okay.
So.
My understanding.
We're this bad.
So let me apologize.
Pardon.
I'm going to probably order this.
So I apologize.
Yeah.
Okay.
So it is my understanding.
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
So.
You find.
There is no difference between ultimate and conventional reality.
What?
It all happens here.
And if that is so, then isn't clairvoyance only in appearance?
In other words, it, it seems to be, it appears to be, but it is.
I'm going to go with a perception rather than a direct cognition, because it
gets viewed as something more in the ultimate nature than actually just kind
of what occurs.
In other words, what appears to us as clairvoyance is just naturally occurring.
It's just a play of things as they happen.
There is no real actual control or intention or.
Clairvoyance.
I use the word.
I think so.
You're talking that I will use the clairvoyance.
We're talking about awareness, right?
Awareness is clarity.
Yes.
Clarity.
And then I use the also require is a clairvoyance.
So what, what, what, what means clairvoyance?
You tell me.
It's my understanding that clairvoyance would be an awareness of things
beyond what other people would be aware of, first of all, in a conventional
sense.
And that would be, for example, what might be going to happen, or what people
might be seeing.
Oh, okay.
Then, then I'm sorry.
I should use the wrong word.
Clairvoyance.
I shouldn't use clairvoyance.
I just use, I should use require as clarity.
Clarity.
So an understanding, so that it would be an understanding of things.
The require is clarity, but all of the require can make the clairvoyance.
Require is clarity.
Require is clarity means require has systems.
Require is systems.
That require can make the clairvoyance of the future or whatever, as you said.
But if you view that as clairvoyance, haven't you just created duality?
Yes, it is dualities.
Definitely, the clairvoyance then as the prediction of all this is dualities.
But this is a duality, something useful.
But isn't it more useful to live the moment and not have duality?
Well, this is better to have no dualities.
But then duality is not something that, again, it's okay teaching.
We should not think duality is enemy.
Oh, not enemy.
No, the duality is obstacle.
The deception.
Yes, duality is a person.
Deluded.
Yes, deluded.
Isn't it kind of like teetering on the rig of falling back over?
Yes, yes, right.
But if you can stay beyond the duality, duality, if you have that capabilities,
that is wonderful.
Is this, again, a matter of balance?
Say that again.
Can you keep your balance on a razor blade, you know, on the head of a pen?
But when you don't have duality, when you are out of duality, definitely you are balanced.
Definitely you are balanced because duality is one who is making unbalance.
But if you are free from the duality, then definitely you are.
I don't understand how you state it.
If you're looking at clear points, how you know?
No, I'm not talking about clear points.
I'm sorry.
I shouldn't use the word clear points.
I use clarity.
Clarity, clarity status.
But receiving clarity as a future understandings.
No, the future understandings.
That's fine.
For example, this is not called duality.
This is the omniscient or the clear points.
But because of the knowledge of the wisdom they have, they can tell.
But for them, it's not dualities.
What means duality, actually?
What means duality?
Duality is dividing the moment into anything but the moment.
Okay, I think I will say, of course it's true.
What do you say it's true?
But duality means attachment, clinging, clinging, clinging, clinging.
But Buddhas, in light of being, even this test says all these different things on the relative
level.
It's not talking about grasping and clinging.
This is why you need to teach, right?
So you can get confidence in these things.
This is why one needs a teacher, right?
That's true.
The teacher is always good.
The teacher is a spiritual friend who can help assist or qualify.
The teacher is a spiritual friend who can actually practice on the right path and all the way to
the Buddha.
And therefore, the Buddha says the teaching.
The teacher says, "Oh, Hari Buddha, until you reach enlightenment,
you should always contract to the spiritual friend."
I think I need a friend.
That's it, of course. I need two.
If I understood you correctly,
when you were discussing this present mind,
what are the qualities you said?
Was it free from the traces of the past?
In light of that, could you say something a little bit about memory
and how that functions with the present mind?
No, this memory is, again, part of the intelligence.
Part of the intelligence, which is wonderful.
Memories are always that.
But when you look into the nature of the present mind,
the present mind, when you are staying to the present mind,
or when you are in the present mind status,
when you look to the past mind,
where the past mind went.
So, what answer do we have about the past mind?
Mind.
And when there is no answer to the past mind,
therefore, in the teaching also said,
even there is not just about the present mind where you went,
but even there is no trail,
trail or the trace of the past mind.
Mind went.
Because past mind means something went, right?
Something is gone.
So, if there is any trail of that past mind...
That's what I'm saying.
Potentially, you could say that memory is...
But that is a recollecting of the conceptions,
your thought, which is good.
But the real...
Is there a restriction between the past and the mind itself?
Yeah, but it's a recollectment of the past memories.
Past memories, of course, that is called your wisdom.
The wisdom is there, memories are there.
But we're looking to the present status.
We're not looking to the past memories or any of those.
But we're looking to the right standard on the present state of our awareness,
and then look to our past mind.
Past mind, this present moment is past.
Past few minutes ago, where that mind went?
Where that mind went?
If you look to that mind,
if not just we have the answer of the mind where it went,
but even if there is some trace that we can follow or trail of that,
there is even that not there.
That is what's talking, not the memories.
Of course, also if the memory level is the same thing,
memory, of course, is important, but where is memory?
If you look to the memory itself, self,
again, what is this?
I mean, nature is pervasive.
This is not something that we can go or do something different.
Again, memories, where is memories?
Memories and what?
Of course, memories we collect.
Yesterday, I did all these things.
We collect that.
But where is this?
Everything now?
I mean, this answer is the same.
Or the result is the same.
Nature is the same.
Okay?
[INAUDIBLE]
And there's one place that there were,
says we talk about ground path and fruition dualistically
as if three things.
These are like levels of space.
So there's no rule.
So could you say then that the past, the present, and the future,
in our mind we think there are three things.
But really it's just like in space,
we can't say past, present, future because it's all connected.
There is no, there's no complete past, there's no complete future.
And even the present moment, we can't grasp it.
That's really true.
I mean, that's true.
Who can say it's not true to Moharrambhuji?
Moharrambhuji is true, exactly.
Really true, that's true.
I mean, not just because Moharrambhuji said we believe in that,
but this is what is ground.
I mean, of course, always in the teaching said,
said that ground path and a result.
Or in the debate said, [INAUDIBLE]
said, what is that?
It's all talking about this rupa, rupa.
And ground is a rupa, and the path is a rupa,
and the result is a rupa.
And where is a rupa?
Then Moharrambhuji said, it's like making different kind
of levels of the skies.
Skies, this and that things.
It's just old.
But we need this, even though they're dead.
But for us, duality level, because that's
what we're going to actualize this natural realization
with that understanding, that framework.
That's what the teaching said.
The skillful means-- this skillful means a way
to usher us to that path.
And then finally, we explore.
All is the same.
And not just the only ground path is the same,
but all the samsara and the rana is the same.
Then it's called inseparable status
of the samsara and the rana.
Yes, please.
To direct cognition, or direct experience, direct knowing,
if I can discriminate or allow to fall away all the five skandhas
and have direct cognition, isn't that of a self?
And in Buddhism, you talk about there being no actual self.
And yet, the one who experiences direct cognition,
if not the one who experiences it.
I'm going to make phone call, trying to--
trying to make phone call.
I don't know.
Line is always busy and can't reach.
So I don't know.
I mean, the answer will come.
But this direct valid cognition--
cognitions and this is no self--
is actually, of course, is all the teachings.
But direct valid cognition is talking more
from everything of this.
It will be looked at more on the relative true levels.
Relative levels.
No self is in absolute levels.
And in the relative level, definitely we have self.
And relative level means what?
Illusion levels.
Illusion level, we have self.
We have you.
We have I.
We have mountain.
We have tree.
And that's what even the Buddha said.
I'm going to go Varanasi.
I'm going to go to the Buddha Gaya.
I'm going to go with Charlie.
And then bring me this bowl of water or something.
I mean, see those.
Those are all the relative levels.
Relative levels.
So relative level, definitely we have the direct
valid cognition, which is going to explore
that absolute level as no self.
Self.
So the direct valid cognition on the relative level,
definitely you're going to discover
one valid cognition, that on the relative level
of your eye or self.
You understand, right?
How would it be ever possible to comment about
an absolute reality if there wasn't the capacity to do that?
How?
Say that again.
How would one ever even have a consideration
about an absolute reality except from the vantage point
of being someone?
No, that is when on the relative level,
for example, you ask yourself, self, yourself,
when you're meditating, as we're exploring today,
for example, this, and when you don't have any answers
of this, this, and that is really according Buddhism,
that is zoking level.
You reach to the point.
You really reach to the absolute levels.
And absolute is only going to behold through the meditation.
And then your meditation becomes stronger and stronger,
then there is nothing to make divisions between
the absolute relative.
All is the same.
Same.
Therefore, now for us, we have the duality,
we have this division, so therefore we're going to work
with the joyful effort, devotion, and bodhicata,
and really strongly kind of maintaining that
and explore the natural as we discover,
try to make stronger and stronger and deeper and deeper.
And then finally, then you see all is just
in one great economic status.
Thank you.
Yes, thank you.
Thank you very much for your talk.
Thank you.
I would like to just summarize, if you don't mind,
saying that to my mind, the only confusion that ever happens
is because we are afraid to go beyond the mind of concept.
Mm-hmm.
That's really true.
Many times we are very scared.
For example, that's what the Buddhist teaching,
Buddha's teaching, there are six paramatas.
What's it called?
The six paramatas among the third paramata is what?
Patient paramata.
And the patient paramata is the one known as
then have the courage and confidence,
confidence on the nature of the mind or nature.
Many times we're scared because the duality mind
or the ego-cling or the self is always like to hold something.
Always.
So when we are releasing that trouble,
it really brings and therefore Buddha gives the teachings
according to the readiness of the teachings.
And really Buddha lay out that Buddha didn't give all the way,
every teaching immediately that he pointed out
possible noble truth, which is very suitable,
which is very carnal-like.
It's just exactly where the world is.
And so Kaggle there and then gradually Buddha lead.
Lead to that.
So therefore it's true what you said.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Thank you.
Then we do short meditation.
And then we again do short dedication.
I'm going to do some prayers.
So join your intention with my prayers.
www.mooji.org
[BLANK_AUDIO]